## Introduction to Genomics MOOC

Why study Genomics?

* Understand developmental biology
* Understand how mutations cause cancer
* Central dogma: information flows in one direction

##### Genomics is the study of Genomes
Function: what does the Genome do? How do sequences change over time?
After sequencing, mapping is necessary: where are the genes?

##### Genomic data science
Genes must be aligned to the reference genome to work out whether there is more or less of the experiment genes. 

Raw sequence data can be fed to software packages to find out which genes were turned on/off in the sample

Integrative genomics: data from sequencing used with other disciplines to draw biological conclusions (could also be called systems biology)

##### Measurement technology

* Sanger sequencing - to 1990s
* Microarrays
* 2nd Gen - since 2007
* 3rd Gen - new

Highest throughput currently Illumina

Next Gen sequencing: the DNA to be sequenced is broken into pieces and attached to a plate, in clusters. DNA polymerase is used to add a complementary base to these clusters, and after each addition, a colour is read from each cluster on the plate. The purity of the colour is used to estimate the quality of the analysis.

#####Applications of next generation sequencing

Transcriptomics, epigenomics and genomics

Exome sequencing - to find what the proteins are. A bead has sequences only found in exons. It binds to DNA so exons can be isolated.

RNA-seq - poly A tail is used to identify the RNA. Reverse transcriptase makes DNA from RNA. (Transcriptomics)

ChIP-Seq -  where on the DNA might the protein bind? Proteins are first cross linked to the DNA where they bind so they are fixed. Antibodies are used to pull out the proteins and small fragments of DNA cross linked to them. Then the DNA is sequenced.

Bisulfite sequencing or Methyl seq - where was the DNA methylated? Split DNA into 2 identical samples. Methyl groups always attached to Cs. In one, unmethylated Cs are converted to Us. The two sequences are aligned and compared by sequencing. (Epigenomics)

##### Software engineering
All the letters of the alphabet and other necessary symbols can be encoded in 8-bit binary (128 combinations of 1 or 0). To encode A, G, C, T, only 2 bits are needed (4 combinations). This makes algorithms much more efficient.

Alignment for example is a well known software engineering challenge, for example to find RNA editing.
Problem: are differences real, or are they due to the occasional misalignment? Algorithms can go wrong even if they are carefully crafted.

RNA-seq: find which genes were turned on and off in the sample.
“Tuxedo tools” pipeline can be used.

* Bowtie aligns to ref genome (superseded BWA)
* Tophat: spliced alignment (superseded HISAT)
* Cufflinks: transcript assembly (superseded StringTie)
* Cuffdiff: differential expression (supersede Ballgown)
* Splice isoforms: different proteins form from different rearrangement 

##### Statistics
Visualisation of data always necessary. Transforms needed for proper visualisation.
MA plot: add two replicates on x axis, subtract them on the y axis. More informative than just one replicate versus the other.

Power: if there’s a real difference, with what sample size will it be detected?

Permutation testing: remove link between group and collected value, and randomly select new groups. Repeat many times and compare to the statistic generated by the real groups.

##### Multiple correction testing
Family wise error rate - control even one false positive

False discovery rate - false positives/total discoveries (e.g. 0.05/550 if there were 550 genes associated)